.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.\"
.Dd December 22, 2023
.Dt RGBDS 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rgbds
.Nd Rednex Game Boy Development System
.Sh EXAMPLES
To get a working ROM image from a single assembly source file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ rgbasm \-o game.o game.asm
$ rgblink \-o game.gb game.o
$ rgbfix \-v \-p 0 game.gb
.Ed
.Pp
Or in a single command line, without creating an intermediate object file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ (rgbasm -o - - | rgblink -o - - | rgbfix -v -p 0) < game.asm > game.gb
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr rgbasm 1 ,
.Xr rgbasm 5 ,
.Xr rgblink 1 ,
.Xr rgblink 5 ,
.Xr rgbfix 1 ,
.Xr rgbgfx 1 ,
.Xr gbz80 7 ,
.Xr rgbds 5
.Sh HISTORY
.Bl -item
.It
1996-10-01:
.An Carsten S\(/orensen
.Pq a.k.a. SurfSmurf
releases xAsm, xLink, and RGBFix, a Game Boy SM83 (GBZ80) assembler/linker system for DOS/Win32.
.It
1997-07-03: S\(/orensen releases ASMotor, packaging the three programs together and moving towards making them a general-purpose target-independent system.
.It
1999-08-01:
.An Justin Lloyd
.Pq a.k.a. Otaku no Zoku
adapts ASMotor to re-focus on SM83 assembly/machine code, and releases this version as RGBDS.
.It
2009-06-11:
.An Vegard Nossum
adapts the code to be more UNIX-like and releases this version as rgbds-linux.
.It
2010-01-12:
.An Anthony J. Bentley
forks Nossum's repository.
The fork becomes the reference implementation of RGBDS.
.It
2015-01-18:
.An stag019
begins implementing rgbgfx, a PNG‐to‐Game Boy graphics converter, for eventual integration into RGBDS.
.It
2016-09-05: rgbgfx is integrated into Bentley's repository.
.It
2017-02-23: Bentley's repository is moved to the
.Lk https://github.com/rednex/rgbds rednex
organization.
.It
2018-01-26: The codebase is relicensed under the MIT license.
.It
2020-09-15: The repository is moved to the
.Lk https://github.com/gbdev/rgbds gbdev
organization.
.It
2022-05-17: The
.Lk https://rgbds.gbdev.io
website for RGBDS documentation and downloads is published.
.El
