.Dd $\&Mdocdate$
.Dt RGBFIX 1
.Os RGBDS Manual
.Sh NAME
.Nm rgbfix
.Nd Game Boy checksum fixer
.\" SECTION
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm rgbfix
.Op Fl Ccdjqrsv
.Op Fl k Ar licensee_str
.Op Fl m Ar mbc_type
.Op Fl p Ar pad_value
.Op Fl r Ar ram_size
.Op Fl t Ar title_str
.Ar file Ns Op .gb
.\" SECTION
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
program changes headers of Game Boy ROM images. It also performs other
filetype operations, such as truncation. The arguments are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.\" ITEM
.It Fl C
Set the Game Boy Color compatible flag: [0x143] = 0x80. This flag and the
.Fl c
flag are mutually exclusive.
.\" ITEM
.It Fl c
Set the Game Boy Color only flag: [0x143] = 0xC0. This flag and the
.Fl C
flag are mutually exclusive.
.\" ITEM
.It Fl d
Don't perform any changes, just pretend to for debugging.
.\" ITEM
.It Fl j
Set the non-Japanese region flag: [0x14A] = 1.
.\" ITEM
.It Fl k Ar licensee_str
Set the new licensee string ([0x144\(en0x145]) to a given string, truncated
to at most two characters.
.\" ITEM
.It Fl m Ar mbc_type
Set the MBC type, [0x147], to a given value from 0 to 0xFF.
.\" ITEM
.It Fl p Ar pad_value
Pad the image to a valid size with a given pad value from 0 to 0xFF.
.Nm
will automatically pick a size from 32KiB, 64KiB, 128KiB, ..., 8192KiB and
give a warning thereafter. The cartridge size byte ([0x148]) will be changed
to reflect this new size.
.\" ITEM
.It Fl q
Enable quiet mode, suppressing all text except errors.
.\" ITEM
.It Fl r Ar ram_size
Set the RAM size, [0x149], to a given value from 0 to 0xFF.
.\" ITEM
.It Fl s
Set the SGB flag: [0x146] = 3, and set the old licensee code: [0x14B] = 0x33.
.\" ITEM
.It Fl t Ar title
Set the title string ([0x134\(en0x143]) to a given string, truncated to at
most 16 characters. It is recommended to use 15 characters instead, to avoid
clashing with the CGB flag (
.Fl c
or
.Fl C
.Ns ).
.\" ITEM
.It Fl v
Validate the header and fix checksums: the Nintendo character area
([0x104\(en0x133]), the header checksum ([0x14D]), and the global checksum
([0x14E\(en0x14F]).
.El
.\" SECTION
.Sh EXAMPLES
Most values in the ROM header are only cosmetic. The bare minimum requirements
for a workable image are checksums, the Nintendo logo, and (if needed) the
CGB/SGB flags. It is a good idea to pad the image to a valid size as well
("valid" meaning a multiple of 32KiB).
.Pp
The following will make a plain, no-color Game Boy game without checking for
a valid size:
.Pp
.D1 $ rgbfix \-v foo.gb
.Pp
The following will make a SGB-enabled, color-enabled game with a title of
"foobar", and pad it to a multiple of 32KiB. (The Game Boy itself does not
use the title, but some emulators or ROM managers might.)
.Pp
.D1 $ rgbfix \-vCs \-p 0 \-t foobar baz.gb
.Pp
The following will duplicate the header (sans global checksum) of the game
"Survival Kids":
.Pp
.D1 $ rgbfix \-Cjsv \-k A4 \-m 0x1B \-p 0xFF \-r 3 \-t SURVIVALKIDAVKE SurvivalKids.gbc
.\" SECTION
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr rgbds 7 ,
.Xr rgbasm 1 ,
.Xr rgblib 1 ,
.Xr rgblink 1 ,
.Xr gbz80 7
.\" SECTION
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm
was originally released by Carsten Sørensen as a standalone program called
gbfix. It was later integrated with the ASMotor package, which became RGBDS.
